.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Ken Arnold.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)fortune.6	8.3 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 26, 2021
.Dt FORTUNE 6
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fortune
.Nd "print a random, hopefully interesting, adage"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl acCDefilosw
.Op Fl m Ar pattern
.Op Fl n Ar length
.Op Fl t Ar tries
.Op Fl ?|--help
.Op Fl -version
.Op Fl -debug
.Op Fl -
.Oo
.Op Ar \&N%
.Ar file Ns / Ns Ar directory Ns / Ns Cm all
.Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When
.Nm
is run with no arguments it prints out a random epigram from the
.Pa fortunes
database.
Epigrams are divided into several categories, where each category
is subdivided into those which are potentially offensive and those
which are not.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a
Choose from all lists of maxims, both offensive and not
(See the
.Fl o
option for more information on offensive fortunes).
.It Fl c
Show the cookie file from which the fortune came. 
.It Fl C
Compatibility mode. Try to imitate the original BSD
.Nm
command display as closely as possible.
.It Fl D
Enable additional debugging output.
Specify this option multiple times for more verbose output
(unused in this re-implementation).
.It Fl e
Consider all fortune files to be of equal size (see discussion below
on multiple files).
.It Fl f
Print out the list of files which would be searched, but do not
print a fortune.
.It Fl i
Ignore case for
.Fl m
patterns.
.It Fl l
Long dictums only. See
.Fl n
on how ''long'' is defined.
.It Fl m Ar pattern
Print out all fortunes which match the regular expression
.Ar pattern .
See
.Xr regex 3
for a description of patterns.
.It Fl n Ar length
Set the longest fortune length (in characters) considered to be ''short'' (the default is 160).
All fortunes longer than this are considered ''long''.
.It Fl o
Choose only from potentially offensive aphorisms.
This option is superseded by
.Fl a .
.Ef
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
\&... let us keep in mind the basic governing philosophy
of The Brotherhood, as handsomely summarized in these words:
we believe in healthy, hearty laughter -- at the expense of
the whole human race, if needs be.
Needs be.
                           --H. Allen Smith, "Rude Jokes"
.Ed
.It Fl s
Short apophthegms only. See
.Fl n
on how ''short'' is defined.
.It Fl t Ar tries
Set the maximum number of attempts while searching for a ''short''
or ''long'' fortune (the default is 10).
.It Fl w
Wait before termination for an amount of time calculated from the
number of characters in the message.
This is useful if it is executed as part of the logout procedure
to guarantee that the message can be read before the screen is cleared.
.It Fl ?|--help
Show usage and exit.
.It --version
Show version and exit.
.It --debug
Enable debug mode.
.El
.Pp
The user may specify alternate sayings.
You can specify a specific file, a directory which contains one or
more files, or the special word
.Cm all
which says to use all the standard databases.
Any of these may be preceded by a percentage, which is a number
.Ar N
between 0 and 100 inclusive, followed by a
.Ql % .
If it is, there will be an
.Ar N
percent probability that an adage will be picked from that file
or directory.
If the percentages do not sum to 100, and there are specifications
without percentages, the remaining percent will apply to those files
and/or directories, in which case the probability of selecting from
one of them will be based on their relative sizes.
.Pp
As an example, given two databases
.Pa funny
and
.Pa not-funny ,
with
.Pa funny
twice as big, saying
.Pp
.Dl "fortune funny not-funny"
.Pp
will get you fortunes out of
.Pa funny
two-thirds of the time.
The command
.Pp
.Dl "fortune 90% funny 10% not-funny"
.Pp
will pick out 90% of its fortunes from
.Pa funny
(the
.Dq Li "10% not-funny"
is unnecessary, since 10% is all that is left).
The
.Fl e
option says to consider all files equal;
thus
.Pp
.Dl "fortune -e funny not-funny"
.Pp
is equivalent to
.Pp
.Dl "fortune 50% funny 50% not-funny"
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev FORTUNE_PATH"
.It Ev FORTUNE_PATH
The search path for the data files.
It is a colon-separated list of directories in which
.Nm
looks for data files.
If not set it will default to
.Pa /usr/share/games/fortune:/usr/local/share/games/fortune .
.Pp
Under a Posix system,
.Pa $HOME/.local/share/games/fortune
will also be added to the default, while
.Pa %HOMEPATH%/appdata/roaming/python/share/games/fortune
.Pa :%HOMEPATH%/appdata/local/programs/python/pythonXX/share/games/fortune
will be added under a Windows system.
.Pp
If none of the directories specified exist, it will print a warning and exit.
Note that by default,
.Nm
only searches for a
.Pa fortunes
file, instead of all files in its
.Ev FORTUNE_PATH .
.It Ev FORTUNE_SAVESTATE
If set, fortune will save some state about what fortune
it was up to on disk (unused in this re-implementation,
as it requires root access to the fortune directories).
.It Ev FORTUNE_COMPAT
Compatibility mode. If set, try to imitate the original BSD
fortune command display as closely as possible.
.It Ev FORTUNE_DEBUG
Debug mode. If set, print some debug messages.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/share/games/fortune/*"
.It Pa /usr/share/games/fortune/*
the fortunes databases (those files ending
.Dq Pa -o
contain the
.Sy offensive
fortunes)
.It Pa /usr/local/share/games/fortune/*
Additional fortunes
.El
.Pp
We offer many data files for this utility in several additional packages,
a few of them already installed as a dependency to this one.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
In particular, if
.Fl l ,
.Fl m ,
or
.Fl s
is specified, failure to find a matching citation in the selected
files counts as an error.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Boxing the fortune output with
.Xr echobox 1 :
.Bd -literal
/usr/local/bin/fortune unix-philosophy unix-quotes | echobox -S single
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cowsay 1 ,
.Xr echobox 1 ,
.Xr regex 3 ,
.Xr strfile 8
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
utility is a standard UNIX command, though not a part of POSIX.
.Pp
This version tries to follow the PEP 8 style guide for Python code.
.Sh PORTABILITY
Tested OK under Windows.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in
.At v7 .
.Pp
The much more sophisticated BSD version which this version re-implement
was written by Ken Arnold around the end of 1978 and released with
.Bx 4
and
.Bx 4.1c
between 1980 and 1982.
.Pp
This re-implementation was made for the
.Lk https://github.com/HubTou/PNU [PNU project]
.Pp
It also has the
.Fl c
and
.Fl n
options of the Linux version. And it added
.Fl C
and
.Fl t
options of its own.
.Sh LICENSE
This utility is available under the 3-clause BSD license.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Hubert Tournier
.Pp
The man page is derived from the FreeBSD project's one.
.Sh CAVEATS
There are some display differences with the
.Fl f
option between this re-implementation and classical BSD or Linux versions.
For instance, probability percentages are printed for all files, not just
those indicated.
.Pp
Another difference is that this re-implementation does not risk permanently searching for a short or long fortune in a data file which has none.
It will make the specified number of attempts, then exit with an error code if nothing was found.
